---
layout: doc
sidebar: hidden
title: Multiples of 3 or 5
author: Kevin Damm
---

# Problem 1: {{ $frontmatter.title }}

If we list all the natural numbers below $10$ that are multiples of $3$ or $5$,
we get $3, 5, 6$ and $9$. The sum of these multiples is $23$.

<marching-numbers limit=9>
  <template #zero><div class="hidden"></div></template>
</marching-numbers>

<div class="numbers-grid-15">
  <div class="numbers-zero">0</div>
  <div class="numbers-cell" v-for="index in 9">{{ index }}</div>
  <div> = </div>
  <div class="numbers-cell gray">23</div>
</div>

Find the sum of all the multiples of $3$ or $5$ below $1000$.

---

[[toc]]


<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref, computed } from "vue";
import type { Ref } from "vue";
import MarchingNumbers from "./components/MarchingNumbers.vue"

// A single-value state for each algorithm visualization.
const selection_count = ref(0)
const constant_n = ref(0)

class IntegerParameter {
  value: number;

  constructor(initialValue: number) {
    this.value = initialValue;
  }

  increment() { this.value += 1 }
  decrement() { this.value -= 1 }
}

// State for the generalized solution.
const limit = ref(100)
const a = ref(new IntegerParameter(3))
const b = ref(new IntegerParameter(5))
const k = computed(() => constant_n/lcm(a.value.value))

function incrementSelection() {
  var next = selection_count.value
  next = Math.min(
    (Math.floor(next / 3) + 1) * 3,
    (Math.floor(next / 5) + 1) * 5)
  selection_count.value = next
}

function nodiv_3_5(i: number): bool {
  return i%3 != 0 && i%5 != 0
}

function numberclass(num: number): string {
  var classes = []
  if (num % 3 == 0) {
    classes.push("div-a")
    if (num % 5 == 0) {
      classes.push("div-ab")
    }
  } else {
    if (num % 5 == 0) {
      classes.push("div-b")
    }
  }

  return classes.join(" ")
}

function lcm(a: number, b: number): number {
  // Javascript and floating-point error, let's round to be sure, though it's
  // only needed when a*b is many orders of magnitude larger than gcd(a, b).
  return Math.round((a * b) / gcd(a, b));
}

function gcd(a: number, b: number): number {
  if (b === 0) {
    return a;
  }
  return gcd(b, a % b);
}
</script>


## Sequential Approach

<marching-numbers>
</marching-numbers>

This problem doesn't need much consideration &mdash; only 1000 values have to be
inspected and it's a simple property, integer divisibility, something that we
can check with the _modulus operator_ (`%`) easily.

::: code-group

```py [python]
sum(i for i in range(N) if (i%3 == 0 or i%5 == 0))
```

<<< @/golang/p0001/solve.go#naive [golang]

<<< @/prolog/p0001.naive.prolog{10-14} [prolog]

:::

A direct and brute-force approach like this will still complete in less than a
second, even on a small device.

Under a minute, really, even if you include the time for typing the code out.


## Selection Approach

<div class="numbers-grid">
  <div class="numbers-plus" @click="incrementSelection"> +? </div>
  <div class="numbers-cell"
    v-for="i in selection_count"
    :class="{ 'hidden': nodiv_3_5(i) }">{{ i }}</div>
</div>

That naïve solution inspects all natural values below $n$, even though we know
that about half of them are not divisible by $3$ nor by $5$.

To save having to div/mod each of these excluded values, we can count upwards
in increments of these numbers, making sure to only count the multiples of three
or five.

::: code-group

```python [python]
def gen_multiples(n: int) -> Iterator[int]:
  """Generate all integers between 1..n that are divisible by either 3 or 5."""
  for i3 in range(3,n,3):
    yield i3

  for i5 in range(5,n,15):
    # skip each third multiple of 5,
    yield i5
    i5 += 5
    if i5 < n:
      # ...careful not to exceed n.
      yield i5

sum(gen_multiples(100))
```

<<< @/golang/p0001/solve.go#selection [golang]

<<< @/prolog/p0001.select.prolog{6,15-17} [prolog]

:::

This skips a lot of unnecessary computation by only looking at the numbers that
we know will be included in the sum.  You could simplify the second loop to look
at every five-multiple and skip when the number also divides $3$, but we know in
advance that will always be the third one (the one divisible by $15$).

The order that these numbers are added together is not strictly increasing.
Since that doesn't affect the final result, and it's a little easier to read
this way anyway, I've left it as two separate for-loops.  An
[example of interleaving the series so that the numbers are in sorted order](
 https://github.com/kevindamm/projecteuler/blob/main/python/p0001.py)
can be found in the github repo for this site.

## Constant-time Approach

As $n$ gets bigger, the time spent iterating through the multiples of three and
five increases as well.  Do we have to look at every multiple, even if we're
only examining known multiples?

Realigning the previous solution will reveal a pattern that emerges:

<div class="numbers-grid-15">
  <div class="numbers-zero">0</div>
  <div class="numbers-cell" v-for="index in 99">{{ index }}</div>
</div>

The components of the above are the arithmetic sum,
in steps of $3$ and in steps of $5$,
with the combined steps of $3 \times 5 = 15$ being counted twice,
so it should be subtracted from the total.  For the above example of n=99,

$$ \textcolor{#2AA198} {
  \sum_{i=1}^{\lfloor n/3 \rfloor} 3i
}
+
\textcolor{#268BD2} {
  \sum_{i=1}^{\lfloor n/5 \rfloor} 5i
}
-
\textcolor{#D33682} {
  \sum_{i=1}^{\lfloor n/15 \rfloor} 15i
}
=
\textcolor{#2AA198} {3 * 1122 \over 2}
+
\textcolor{#268BD2} {5 * 380 \over 2}
-
\textcolor{#D33682} {15 * 42 \over 2}
$$


Another way to look at this is to separate out the common parts of each column
and row in the above grid, resulting in one part that increases vertically
and another part that is the same for every row.

<div class="sepvis"><div>

$15 \times \sum_0^k 1$ for

  <div class="numbers-grid" v-for="times in 6">
    <div
     v-for="index in [0,3,5,6,9,10,12]"
     :class="{'div-a': index % 3 == 0, 'div-b': index % 5 == 0}"
    > <i> {{ (times-1)*15 }} </i>
    </div></div>
</div><div>

$k \times \sum_0^k x$ for

  <div class="numbers-grid" v-for="times in 6" margin="5px">
    <div
     v-for="index in [0,3,5,6,9,10,12]"
     :class="{'div-a': index % 3 == 0, 'div-b': index % 5 == 0}"
    > <i> {{ index }} </i>
    </div>
  </div>
</div></div>

This is in terms of $k$, the number of rows (or, $n \div 15$ rounded down, where
$n$ is the final counted value).

```go
n := limit - 1
k := n / 15 // number of rows (except partial final row)
rowcount := 5 /*3s*/ + 3 /*5s*/ - 1 /*common*/
rowsum := 0 + 3 + 5 + 6 + 9 + 10 + 12

sum := rowcount * 15 * k * (k - 1) / 2
sum += k * rowsum
```

The last row may be partial, a few values remaining between $15 \times k$ and
$n$. We can sum those up in a couple of small for loops, adding them to the
main result.  Or, since we know the row size consists of non-shared multiples
of $3$ and $5$, we can use some number theory to arrive at the result without
even having to loop through the numbers in the last row.

<div class="sepvis"><div>
  <div class="numbers-grid">
    <div
     v-for="index in [0,3,5,6,9]"
     :class="{'div-a': index % 3 == 0, 'div-b': index % 5 == 0}"
    > <i> 90 </i>
    </div></div>
</div><div>
  <div class="numbers-grid">
    <div
     v-for="index in [0,3,5,6,9]"
     :class="{'div-a': index % 3 == 0, 'div-b': index % 5 == 0}"
    > <i> {{ index }} </i>
    </div></div>
</div></div>

```go
// Add remaining multiples of 3 and 5 (excluding n).
delta := n - k*15
div3, div5 := delta/3, delta/5
sum += k*15*(div3+div5+1) +
  div3*(div3+1)*3/2 +
  div5*(div5+1)*5/2
```

To understand the last three lines, it helps to think of the last (partial) row
as its own
[arithmetic series](#arithmetic-series)
for the threes and fives separately,
offset by the $k$th row as with all of the previous rows.  The `div3` and `div5`
are the limits on these smaller series, arrived at by counting the numbers
between $n$ and the last $k \times 15$ value.  You can see the sequence this creates
for the full row by looking at the definition of `rowsum`, and this can be
generalized as well.


## Generalized Approach

<form> <!-- I feel like some kind of generic form I/O component for describing
and defining parameters would go really far but I want to be careful not to add
confusion to actual forms, and adhere to ARIA as much as possible.
A vocabulary around knobs, switches and sliders would be fun.
Vanilla forms with vue refs will be good enough for now.
 -->
<p>
<label for="limit">Limit:</label>
<button @click="limit.decrement">-</button>
<input name="limit" v-model="limit" />
<button @click="limit.increment">+</button>
<button @click="a.decrement">-</button>
<label for="var_a">a</label>
<input name="var_a" v-model="a" />
<button @click="a.increment">+</button>
<button @click="b.decrement">-</button>
<label for="var_b">b</label>
<input name="var_b" v-model="b" />
<button @click="b.increment">+</button>
</p>
</form>


We could further generalize this to any pair of numbers $a$ and $b$, finding the
sum of their multiples that are less than $n$.  Rather than knowing in advance
to loop every 15, we need to find the
[Least Common Multiple](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Least_common_multiple)
of the pair and use that as our row size.  We can compute it with Euclid's
algorithm (which actually determines the greatest common divisor, which we then
easily derive the LCM from).

```ts
function SumOfPairsLessThan(a: number, b: number, n: number): number {
  const width = lcm(a, b);
  const k = Math.floor(n / width);
  const diva = width / a;
  const divb = width / b;

  const rowcount = diva + divb - 1;
  const rowsum = (diva * (diva + 1) * a + divb * (divb + 1) * b) / 2;

  var sum = rowcount * width * k * (k - 1) / 2;
  sum += k * rowsum;

  const delta = n - 1 - k*width;
  const rema = delta / a;
  const remb = delta / b;
  sum += k * width * (rema + remb + 1);
  sum += rema * (rema + 1) * a / 2;
  sum += remb * (remb + 1) * b / 2;

  return sum
}

function lcm(a: number, b: number): number {
  // Javascript and floating-point error, let's round to be sure, though it's
  // only needed when a*b is many orders of magnitude larger than gcd(a, b).
  return Math.round((a * b) / gcd(a, b));
}

function gcd(a: number, b: number): number {
  if (b === 0) {
    return a;
  }
  return gcd(b, a % b);
}
```


## See Also

### [Arithmetic Series](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/ArithmeticSeries.html)

Central to this problem is the idea of summing over a series of integers, and
the extension to this &ndash; summing over all multiples of an integer.

$$ \sum_i^n {a i} = a \sum_i^n i = a \times \frac{n(n+1)}{2} $$

In some places we had to convert instead to ${n(n-1)} / {2}$ because we were
counting up to _but not including_ the limit value $n$.  If you need help seeing
why the above equation works out, try drawing out the series as a stack of boxes
like a staircase, 1 then 2 then 3 ... until n.  Now, take the second half of it
(the taller part of the staircase) and pivot it around so that it is stacked on
top of the smaller half of the staircase.  This will result in a rectangle with
area $n(n+1)/2$, whether $n$ is odd or even it will be a full rectangular shape.

<!-- TODO nice visualization of this? -->

If $n$ is an even number then they can be stacked directly, column-for-column,
with a height of $n+1$ and a width of $n/2$.
If $n$ is an odd number, then we put the extra column on the slightly larger
side and the largest stack ($n$ units tall) stands alone on the left when we
pivot it around.  The rectangle from joining the two pieces has height $n$ and
width $(n+1)/2$.

Try it yourself with some pencil and paper if you're not seeing it yet!

### [Euclid's Algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclidean_algorithm) (GCD and LCM)

After understanding the series part of the problem, further investigation shows
that the Least Common Multiple decides what the period of interference between
the two divisors is.  This is the series that needs to be subtracted out if it
gets double counted between the 3s and the 5s.

Since we already knew the pair of constants is $3$ and $5$, finding $15$ from
that is straightforward.  However, if it may be any pair of numbers then we'll
need to determine what this other series is.  The GCD is a kind of recursive
remainder search.  The LCM can then be derived from $(a \times b)/$GCD$(a, b)$.

There are actually some interesting identities bewtween the LCM and GCD, and
entire algebras can be derived from their operations.  The computation needed
to find the GCD is also interesting, and the pairs of values which require the
most computation are found along the Fibonacci Sequence.  That is, values which
follow the line $y = \phi x$ require the most computation to find GCD$(x, y)$,
where $\phi$ is the _golden ratio_.  Keep reading the wiki page to see beautiful
symmetries revealed by applying Euclid's Algorithm to complex conjugates!

### [Solution overview](https://projecteuler.net/overview=0001) on projecteuler.net

This doc will only be available if you've already submitted the correct answer.
I'm not going to give you the answer directly, but you can execute the code
examples here, with only minor edits, to find the answer.

The official overview stops at calculating the $(\sum 3i) + (\sum 5i) - (\sum 15i)$
answer.  I preferred my approach for a couple of reasons &ndash; it provides an
avenue to showing the generalized solution, and it doesn't have the same risk of
numeric overflow on large inputs (for languages that don't default to a BigInt).

It is also valuable to read through the forums for any problems you solve, you
may see an elegant solution in a language you are less familiar with.

### [FizzBuzz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fizz_buzz#Programming) programming challenge

Also featured in a
[codinghorror blog commentary](
 https://blog.codinghorror.com/why-cant-programmers-program/)
and used as an interview question for entry-level developer roles.  It isn't
meant to be hard, it's meant to be a minimum evaluation function.  It was
originally a children's game where participants sit in a circle and call out
their response (the next number, or one of fizz, buzz, fizzbuzz).  I don't know the
penalty for getting it wrong (a moment of ridicule?) but you want to get it
right during an interview.

The question usually implies a serial printing of "fizz" (at 3s), "buzz" (at 5s)
and "fizzbuzz" (at 15s) with regular numbers printed whenever neither of these
are the case.  This means the constant-time algorithms (and even the
selection-based one) wouldn't qualify, but I think I would ask if we could just
print how many fizzes, buzzes and fizzbuzzes there are (pointing to this blog
post if necessary) and maybe get a pass on the interview question.  What I'm
saying is, I'm not **above** doing fizzbuzz but you ought to know better than to
ask me.  But, I'll solve it for fun and instruction, sure.


## Exercises

1. Where is the break-even point, i.e. when the constant-time approach goes from
   being worse than the linear-time solution to being better?  This may vary by
   platform based on the cost of a div/mod and chosen values for $a, b$ and $n$.

   Benchmark both solutions on your chosen platform and measure for yourself.

2. In the constant-time solution there is an expression
   `rowcount * 15 * k * (k - 1) / 2`.  How do we know that this division by $2$
   will not give us a $0.5$ remainder that gets truncated off?


3. Further generalize the solution to any three divisors.  In doing so, you
   should be able to see a straightforward approach for any $k$ divisors.


4. What is the computational complexity of finding this sum (with respect to
   $n$) for any $k$ divisors?  If $k$ is not fixed?  If $k$ is larger than $n$?


<style>
.grid2x2 {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: repeat(2, auto);
  grid-gap: 5px;
}
.grid2x2 mjx-container {
  overflow-y: hidden;
}
.grid2x2 div {
  text-align: center;
  justify-content: center;
}

.hidden {
  visibility: hidden;
}
.gray {
  background-color: gray;
}

.numbers-grid-15 {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: repeat(15, 2.5em);
  grid-gap: 5px;
}
.numbers-grid-15 {
  width: 2.5em;
  line-height: 2.5em;
}

.numbers-grid {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: repeat(13, 2.2em);
  grid-gap: 5px;
}
.numbers-grid {
  width: 2.2em;
  line-height: 2.2em;
}

.numbers-grid-15 div,
.numbers-grid div {
  text-align: center;
  border-radius: 5px;
  font-weight: bold;
}

.numbers-cell {
  border: solid 1px #404040;
}

.numbers-zero {
  visibility: hidden;
}

.numbers-plus {
  border-radius: 5px;
  background-color: #B58900;
  text-shadow: 1px 1px;

  text-align: center;
  user-select: none;
}

.numbers-plus:hover {
  text-shadow: 2px 2px;
  filter: brightness(120%);
  cursor: pointer;
}
.numbers-plus:active {
  text-shadow: 2px 2px;
  filter: brightness(120%);
  cursor: grab;
}

.div-a,
.numbers-cell:nth-child(3n+1) {
  background-color: #2AA198;
}

.div-b,
.numbers-cell:nth-child(5n+1) {
  background-color: #268BD2;
}

.div-a {
  &.div-b {
    background-color: #D33682;
  }
}

.numbers-cell:nth-child(15n+1) {
  background-color: #D33682;
}

.sepvis {
  display: grid;
  grid-auto-flow: column;
  margin-left: 2em;
}
.sepvis .numbers-grid {
  margin: 2px 0;
}
</style>

