---
title: "Problem 001 - Multiples of 3 or 5"
author: Kevin Damm
---

[[toc]]

## Problem Description

If we list all the natural numbers below $10$ that are multiples of $3$ or $5$,
we get $3, 5, 6$ and $9$. The sum of these multiples is $23$.

Find the sum of all the multiples of $3$ or $5$ below $1000$.


## Simple Approach

This one doesn't need much consideration &mdash; only 1000 values have to be
inspected and it's a simple property, integer divisibility, something that we
can check with the _modulus operator_ (`%`) easily.

```go
sum := 0
for i := range N {
  if i%5 == 0 || i%3 == 0 {
    sum += i
  }
}
```

A direct and brute-force approach like this will still complete in less than a
second, even on a small device.

Under a minute, really, even if you include the time for typing the code out.


## Selection Approach

That naïve solution inspects all natural values below $n$, even though we know
that $\frac23$ of them are not divisible by $3$ nor by $5$. 

To save having to div/mod each of these excluded values, we can count upwards
in increments of these numbers, making sure to only count the multiples of three
or five.

```python
def gen_divisors(n: int) -> Iterator[int]:
  """Generate all integers between 1..n that are divisible by either 3 or 5."""
  for i3 in range(3,n,3):
    yield i3

  for i5 in range(5,n,15):
    # skip each third multiple of 5,
    yield i5
    i5 += 5
    if i5 < n:
      # ...careful not to exceed n.
      yield i5

sum(gen_divisors(1000))
```

This skips a lot of unnecessary computation by only looking at the numbers that
we know will be included in the sum.  You could simplify the second loop to look
at every five-multiple and skip when the number also divides $3$, but we know in
advance that will always be the third one (the one divisible by $15$).

The order that these numbers are added together is not strictly increasing, but
that does not affect the final result.


## Constant-time Approach

As $n$ gets bigger, the time spent iterating through the multiples of three and
five increases as well.  Do we have to look at every multiple, even if we're
only examining known multiples?

Looking closer at the previous solution will reveal a pattern that emerges:

<div class="numbergrid" data-id="sieve"></div>

The components of the above are the arithmetic sum (in steps of 15):

$$ C * \sum_{i=0}^k i = {105 * k(k - 1) \over 2} $$

where C is 15 (the step size of each row) times 7 (the count of elements
included in each row).

There are also the values within each row, the offsets within the row that are
the same for every row (there are $k$ full rows below $n$).

$$ k * (3 + 5 + 6 + 9 + 10 + 12)  $$

There may be a few values remaining between $15*k$ and $n$, we can sum those up
in a couple of small for loops, adding them to the main result.  Or, since we
know the row size is the least common multiple then only the first ("zero")
value is shared, and we can use some number theory to arrive at the result
without even having to loop through the numbers in the remainder:

```go
k := n / 15 // integer division
rowcount := (5 /*3s*/ + 3 /*5s*/ - 1 /*common*/)
rowsum := (0 + 3 + 5 + 6 + 9 + 10 + 12)

sum := (rowcount * 15 * k * (k - 1) / 2)
sum += k * rowsum

// Add remaining multiples of 3 and 5 (excluding n).
delta := n - 1 - k*15
div3, div5 := delta/3, delta/5
sum += k * 15 * (div3 + div5 + 1)
sum += div3 * (div3 + 1) * 3 / 2
sum += div5 * (div5 + 1) * 5 / 2
```


## Generalized Approach

We could further generalize this to any pair of numbers $m$ and $k$, finding the
sum of their multiples that are less than $n$.  Rather than knowing in advance
to loop every 15, we need to find the
[Least Common Multiple](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Least_common_multiple)
of the pair and use that as our row size.

```
TODO function SumOfPairsLessThan(n: number, m: number, k: number) number
```

_TODO can we cite typescript solutions from the same file? (in vitepress)_ 


## Exercises

1. Where is the break-even point, i.e. when the constant-time approach goes from
   being worse than the linear-time solution to being better?  This may vary by 
   platform based on the cost of a div/mod and chosen values for $m, k$ and $n$.

   Benchmark both solutions on your chosen platform and measure for yourself.

   An example of benchmarking these solutions is included in the 
   [golang solution on GitHub](
    https://github.com/kevindamm/projecteuler/tree/main/golang/p001).


2. In the constant-time solution there is an expression
   `rowcount * 15 * k * (k - 1) / 2`.  How do we know that this division by $2$
   will not give us a $0.5$ remainder that gets truncated off?


3. Further generalize the solution to any three divisors.  In doing so, you
   should be able to see a straightforward approach for any $k$ divisors.


4. What is the computational complexity of finding this sum (with respect to
   $n$) for any $k$ divisors?  If $k$ is not fixed?  If $k$ is larger than $n$?


<script setup lang="ts">
</script>


*TODO sieve visualization*