---
layout: doc
sidebar: hidden
title: Multiples of 3 or 5
author: Kevin Damm
---

# PE 0001: {{ $frontmatter.title }}

<pe100-problem n="1">

If we list all the natural numbers below $10$
that are multiples of $3$ or $5$,
we get $3, 5, 6$ and $9$.
The sum of these multiples is $23$.

<marching-numbers factors="3,5">
  <div data-i=0 class="hidden"></div>
  <div v-for="i in 9" data-i=i>{{ i }}</div>
  <div data-i=10 class="hidden"></div>
  <div class="gray">{{ 23 }}</div>
</marching-numbers>

Find the sum of all the multiples of $3$ or $5$ below $1000$.

</pe100-problem>

---

[[toc]]


<script setup lang="ts">
import { ref, computed } from "vue";
import type { Ref } from "vue";
import MarchingNumbers from "./components/MarchingNumbers.vue"

// A single-value state for each algorithm visualization.
const selection_count = ref(0)
const constant_n = ref(0)

class IntegerParameter {
  value: number;

  constructor(initialValue: number) {
    this.value = initialValue;
  }

  increment() { this.value += 1 }
  decrement() { this.value -= 1 }
}

// State for the generalized solution.
const limit = ref(100)
const a = ref(new IntegerParameter(3))
const b = ref(new IntegerParameter(5))
const k = computed(() => constant_n/lcm(a.value.value))

function incrementSelection() {
  var next = selection_count.value
  next = Math.min(
    (Math.floor(next / 3) + 1) * 3,
    (Math.floor(next / 5) + 1) * 5)
  selection_count.value = next
}

function nodiv_3_5(i: number): bool {
  return i%3 != 0 && i%5 != 0
}

function numberclass(num: number): string {
  var classes = []
  if (num % 3 == 0) {
    classes.push("div-a")
    if (num % 5 == 0) {
      classes.push("div-ab")
    }
  } else {
    if (num % 5 == 0) {
      classes.push("div-b")
    }
  }

  return classes.join(" ")
}

function animateNaive(event: Event) {

}

function lcm(a: number, b: number): number {
  // Javascript and floating-point error, let's round to be sure, though it's
  // only needed when a*b is many orders of magnitude larger than gcd(a, b).
  return Math.round((a * b) / gcd(a, b));
}

function gcd(a: number, b: number): number {
  if (b === 0) {
    return a;
  }
  return gcd(b, a % b);
}
</script>

<!--@include: ./0001/01_naive.md-->

Can we do better?

<!--@include: ./0001/02_select.md-->

<!--@include: ./0001/03_constant.md-->

<!--@include: ./0001/04_general.md-->

## See Also

### [Arithmetic Series](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/ArithmeticSeries.html)

Central to this problem is the idea of summing over a series of integers, and
the extension to this &ndash; summing over all multiples of an integer.

$$ \sum_i^n {a i} = a \sum_i^n i = a \times \frac{n(n+1)}{2} $$

In some places we had to convert instead to ${n(n-1)} / {2}$ because we were
counting up to _but not including_ the limit value $n$.  If you need help seeing
why the above equation works out, try drawing out the series as a stack of boxes
like a staircase, 1 then 2 then 3 ... until n.  Now, take the second half of it
(the taller part of the staircase) and pivot it around so that it is stacked on
top of the smaller half of the staircase.  This will result in a rectangle with
area $n(n+1)/2$, whether $n$ is odd or even it will be a full rectangular shape.

<!-- TODO nice visualization of this? -->

If $n$ is an even number then they can be stacked directly, column-for-column,
with a height of $n+1$ and a width of $n/2$.
If $n$ is an odd number, then we put the extra column on the slightly larger
side and the largest stack ($n$ units tall) stands alone on the left when we
pivot it around.  The rectangle from joining the two pieces has height $n$ and
width $(n+1)/2$.

Try it yourself with some pencil and paper if you're not seeing it yet!

### [Euclid's Algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclidean_algorithm) (GCD and LCM)

After understanding the series part of the problem, further investigation shows
that the Least Common Multiple decides what the period of interference between
the two divisors is.  This is the series that needs to be subtracted out if it
gets double counted between the 3s and the 5s.

Since we already knew the pair of constants is $3$ and $5$, finding $15$ from
that is straightforward.  However, if it may be any pair of numbers then we'll
need to determine what this other series is.  The GCD is a kind of recursive
remainder search.  The LCM can then be derived from $(a \times b)/$GCD$(a, b)$.

There are actually some interesting identities bewtween the LCM and GCD, and
entire algebras can be derived from their operations.  The computation needed
to find the GCD is also interesting, and the pairs of values which require the
most computation are found along the Fibonacci Sequence.  That is, values which
follow the line $y = \phi x$ require the most computation to find GCD$(x, y)$,
where $\phi$ is the _golden ratio_.  Keep reading the wiki page to see beautiful
symmetries revealed by applying Euclid's Algorithm to complex conjugates!

### [Solution overview](https://projecteuler.net/overview=0001) on projecteuler.net

This doc will only be available if you've already submitted the correct answer.
I'm not going to give you the answer directly, but you can execute the code
examples here, with only minor edits, to find the answer.

The official overview stops at calculating the $(\sum 3i) + (\sum 5i) - (\sum 15i)$
answer.  I preferred my approach for a couple of reasons &ndash; it provides an
avenue to showing the generalized solution, and it doesn't have the same risk of
numeric overflow on large inputs (for languages that don't default to a BigInt).

It is also valuable to read through the forums for any problems you solve, you
may see an elegant solution in a language you are less familiar with.

### FizzBuzz (programming challenge)

This puzzle is reminiscent of [FizzBuzz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fizz_buzz#Programming),
but the ProjectEuler.net problem appeard a few years before it became popular
as a test of basic programming ability.

Originally it was a children's game, then suggested by Imran Ghory in
["Using FizzBuzz to Find Developers who Grok Coding"](https://web.archive.org/web/20080405225407/http://imranontech.com/2007/01/24/using-fizzbuzz-to-find-developers-who-grok-coding/).
A month later it was also featured in a
[codinghorror blog commentary](
 https://blog.codinghorror.com/why-cant-programmers-program/)
by Jeff Atwood.
It isn't
meant to be hard, it's meant to be a minimum evaluation function, after conventional
wisdom that 99% of interview candidates cannot actually code even the simplest of functions,
while knowing enough terminology to give the impression that they can.

The question usually implies a serial printing of "fizz" (at 3s), "buzz" (at 5s)
and "fizzbuzz" (at 15s) with the numbers themselves printed otherwies.
This means the constant-time algorithms (and even the selection-based one)
wouldn't qualify, but I think I would ask if we could just
print how many fizzes, buzzes and fizzbuzzes there are (pointing to this blog
post if necessary) and maybe get a pass on the interview question.  What I'm
saying is, I'm not **above** doing fizzbuzz but give me something challenging.

If you want to take this problem to the next level, especially if you're using
it as a starter question in your own interviews, I suggest asking next
"what is the probability that an integer chosen at random in range 1..1000
is divisible by 3 or 5?", especially if you are looking for someone with a
(slightly) deeper mathematical comprehension.  There are numerous topics
branching out from there.


## Exercises

1. Where is the break-even point, i.e. when the constant-time approach goes from
   being worse than the linear-time solution to being better?  This may vary by
   platform based on the cost of a div/mod and chosen values for $a, b$ and $n$.

   Benchmark both solutions on your chosen platform and measure for yourself.  You can find three example
   benchmarks in the [tests of my golang solution](https://github.com/kevindamm/projecteuler/blob/8b9dbac084138fdcfdc8b302691b9e144a192982/golang/p0001_test.go#L55).

2. In the constant-time solution there is an expression
   `rowcount * 15 * k * (k - 1) / 2`.  How do we know that this division by $2$
   will not give us a $0.5$ remainder that gets truncated off?


3. Further generalize the solution to any three divisors.  In doing so, you
   should be able to see a straightforward approach for any $k$ divisors.


4. What is the computational complexity of finding this sum (with respect to
   $n$) for any $k$ divisors?  If $k$ is not fixed?  If $k$ is larger than $n$?


<style>
.grid2x2 {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: repeat(2, auto);
  grid-gap: 5px;
}
.grid2x2 mjx-container {
  overflow-y: hidden;
}
.grid2x2 div {
  text-align: center;
  justify-content: center;
}

.hidden {
  visibility: hidden;
}
.gray {
  background-color: gray;
}

.numbers-grid-15 {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: repeat(15, 2.5em);
  grid-gap: 5px;
}
.numbers-grid-15 {
  width: 2.5em;
  line-height: 2.5em;
}

.numbers-grid {
  display: grid;
  grid-template-columns: repeat(13, 2.2em);
  grid-gap: 5px;
}
.numbers-grid {
  width: 2.2em;
  line-height: 2.2em;
}

.numbers-grid-15 div,
.numbers-grid div {
  text-align: center;
  border-radius: 5px;
  font-weight: bold;
}

.numbers-cell {
  border: solid 1px #404040;
}

.numbers-zero {
  visibility: hidden;
}

.numbers-plus {
  border-radius: 5px;
  background-color: #B58900;
  text-shadow: 1px 1px;

  text-align: center;
  user-select: none;
}

.numbers-plus:hover {
  text-shadow: 2px 2px;
  filter: brightness(120%);
  cursor: pointer;
}
.numbers-plus:active {
  text-shadow: 2px 2px;
  filter: brightness(120%);
  cursor: grab;
}

.div-a,
.numbers-cell:nth-child(3n+1) {
  background-color: #2AA198;
}

.div-b,
.numbers-cell:nth-child(5n+1) {
  background-color: #268BD2;
}

.div-a {
  &.div-b {
    background-color: #D33682;
  }
}

.numbers-cell:nth-child(15n+1) {
  background-color: #D33682;
}

.sepvis {
  display: grid;
  grid-auto-flow: column;
  margin-left: 2em;
}
.sepvis .numbers-grid {
  margin: 2px 0;
}
</style>

