---
layout: doc
sidebar: hidden
title: Sum Square Difference
author: Kevin Damm
---

# PE 0006: {{ $frontmatter.title }}

<pe100-problem n="6">

The sum of the squares of the first ten natural numbers is,

$$ 1^2 + 2^2 + ... + 10^2 = 385 $$

The square of the sum of the first ten natural numbers is,

$$ (1 + 2 + ... + 10)^2 = 55^2 = 3025 $$

Hence the difference between the sum of the squares of the first ten natural
numbers and the square of the sum is $3025 - 385 = 2640$.

Find the difference between the sum of the squares of the first one hundred
natural numbers and the square of the sum.

</pe100-problem>

---

[[toc]]


<script setup lang="ts">

</script>

## A Simple Aggregate

If $n$ is small then we don't have to fuss much about it:

```python
def SqSumSumSqDifference(n):
  sumsquare = sum(x**2 for x in range(1,n+1))
  squaresum = sum(list(range(1,n+1)))**2
  return squaresum - sumsquare
```

Even if $n$ is in the millions this is computable in milliseconds.

## Algebraic Simplification

The simple solution does a lot of adding of intermediate values before arriving
at an answer.  We can get the answer faster just like we did for the algebraic
series in [problem 1](0001.md), bypassing the steps in between by deriving a
direct computation of the answer.

With the algebraic series we found $\sum_i^n$ is $n(n+1)/2$, a polynomial with
an $n^2$ term.  By intuition, if we're summing a series of $i^2$ terms we will
need a polynomial of the next higher degree, _i.e._ having an $n^3$ term.

TODO elaborate

We can determine what these values are for $n \in \lbrace 0, 1, 2, 3 \rbrace$ :

TODO equation table for `[a,b,c,d]=f(n)`


Thus we find the values for these four parameters:

$$
a = 1/3
b = 1/2
c = 1/6
d = 0
$$

or $f(n) = (n/6)(2n+1)(n+1)$ .

```c
int ssss_difference(int n) {
	int sum = (n*n + n) / 2
	int sumsq = n * (2*n + 1) * (n + 1) / 6

	return sum*sum - sumsq
}
```

### Prove it

By induction, if we show that this direct computation holds for $f(1)$ and that
when it holds for $f(n)$ it must also hold for $f(n+1)$, then we've proven that
$f(n)$ always holds.

The first part is easy
because $a + b + c + d = 1$ was part of our original system of equations,
and adding $1/3$, $1/2$, $1/6$ (and $0$) does indeed equal 1.

The second part follows from the relation between the function for $f(n)$ and
$f(n+1)$, they will always be separated by exactly $(n+1)^2$, by definition.
Solving for this equality, we find:

$$
f(n + 1) = f(n) + (n + 1)^2
n^3/3 + 3n^2/2 + 13n/6 + 1 = n/6 + n^2/2 + n^3/3 + n^2 + 2n + 1
equal
$$

TODO the above could have its simplification steps animated


## No-difference solution

A persistent issue with the previous solution, though it saves us a lot of
compute it doesn't avoid a numeric overflow for standard integer types (in most
languages^[Python is a notable exception to this, its default integer type is a
   bigint (it also has intern-ed representations for the first 100 or so
   numbers).  While other languages often include a BigInt type, they're
   rarely the default.] ).
If the ${sum}^2$ term exceeds the maximum `int` value then it
will overflow before subtracting the sum-of-squares term, resulting in an
incorrect answer.

We can address this, up to a point, but eventually even the correct answer will
overflow an int range and we'll need to use a Big-Integer type.  Fortunately,
most languages have a Big-Int type, but I'll bring it up later with a problem
that actually needs to use one.

We might initially try using a signed value, store the smaller (sum of squares)
value as its negative, and then add the larger (square of sum) value.  But doing
that also limits our range to $2^63$ instead of $2^64$ (or $31$ and $32$ on
smaller platforms).  Does this make a difference?

TODO illustration

That's billions of correct answers that we lose the ability to represent.
Instead, we can combine the two together by adding them symbolically and
computing them together, instead of computing them separately and taking the
difference.

TODO algebra

The resulting code is not much more complicated than the simplest implementation

```go
```


## See Also

Algebraic series (related also to problem 0001)

Solving a system of four equations



## Exercises

1. The derivation above jumps directly to a degree-3 ( $n^3$ ) polynomial based on intuition from the $n \rarrow n^2$ representation.  Show that an $n^2$ closed-form representation would not be sufficient.

2. If we had guessed instead a degree-4 ( $n^4$ ) representation, what would be the initial system of five equations?
Does deriving this give us a different answer?  (Look into null spaces for more information).

3. For what range of 32-bit integers does the simple solution overflow while the no-difference version give the correct answer?  For 64-bit integers?  You can try figuring this out algebraicly or by writing some test code.

4. Reordering the operations of `ssss_difference` in the second code example
will lead to incorrect answers (e.g. $2794$ for the example input of 10).  Why
does it only work with the `/ 6` evaluated at the end?  (hint: JavaScript is
an exception on this one).


**Footnotes**
